<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: The Advertisement</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Advertisement</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On New Year’s Day, 1943, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy, head of the great Metallo-Electrical Company, was sitting as usual reading his paper. He skipped the news from the theatre of war rather disrespectfully, avoided the Cabinet crisis, then crowded on sail (for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">People’s Journal</i>, which had grown long ago to five times its ancient size, now afforded enough canvas for an ocean voyage) for the Finance and Commerce section. Here he cruised about for quite a while, then furled his sails, and abandoned himself to his thoughts.</p>
			<p>“The Coal Crisis!” he said to himself. “Mines getting worked out; the Ostrava basin suspending work for years. Heavens above, it’s a sheer disaster! We’ll have to import Upper Silesian coal. Just work out what that will add to the cost of our manufactures, and then talk about competition. We’re in a pretty fix. And if Germany raises her tariff, we may as well shut up shop. And the Industrial Banks going down, too! What a wretched state of affairs! What a hopeless, stupid, stifling state of affairs! Oh, damn the crisis!”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy, Chairman of the Board of Directors, came to a pause. Something was fidgeting him and would not let him rest. He traced it back to the last page of his discarded newspaper. It was the syllable <b>tion</b>, only part of a word, for the fold of the paper came just in front of the <b>t</b>. It was this very incompleteness which had so curiously impressed itself upon him.</p>
			<p>“Well, hang it, it’s probably <b>iron production</b>,” Bondy pondered vaguely, “or <b>prevention</b>, or, maybe, <b>restitution</b>⁠ ⁠… And the Azote shares have gone down, too. The stagnation’s simply shocking. The position’s so bad that it’s ridiculous⁠ ⁠… But that’s nonsense: who would advertise the <b>restitution</b> of anything? More likely <b>resignation</b>. It’s sure to be <b>resignation</b>.”</p>
			<p>With a touch of annoyance, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy spread out the newspaper to dispose of this irritating word. It had now vanished amid the chequering of the small advertisements. He hunted for it from one column to another, but it had concealed itself with provoking ingenuity. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy then worked from the bottom up, and finally started again from the right-hand side of the page. The contumacious “tion” was not to be found.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy did not give in. He refolded the paper along its former creases, and behold, the detestable <b>tion</b> leaped forth on the very edge. Keeping his finger firmly on the spot, he swiftly spread the paper out once more, and found⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy swore under his breath. It was nothing but a very modest, very commonplace small advertisement:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p>Invention</p>
				</header>
				<p>Highly remunerative, suitable for any factory, for immediate sale, personal reasons. Apply <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Marek, Engineer, Břevnov, 1651.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“So that’s all it was!” thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy. “Some sort of patent braces; just a cheap swindle or some crazy fellow’s pet plaything. And here I’ve wasted five minutes on it! I’m getting scatterbrained myself. What a wretched state of affairs! And not a hint of improvement anywhere!”</p>
			<p>He settled himself in a rocking-chair to savour in more comfort the full bitterness of this wretched state of affairs. True, the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.E.C.</abbr> had ten factories and 34,000 employees. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.E.C.</abbr> was the leading producer of iron. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.E.C.</abbr> had no competitor as regards boilers. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.E.C.</abbr> grates were world-famous. But after thirty years’ hard work, gracious Heavens, surely one would have got bigger results elsewhere⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy sat up with a jerk. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Marek, Engineer; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Marek, Engineer. Half a minute: mightn’t that be that red-haired Marek⁠—let’s see, what was his name? Rudolph, Rudy Marek, my old chum Rudy of the Technical School? Sure enough, here it is in the advertisement: ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Marek, Engineer.’ Rudy, you rascal, is it possible? Well, you’ve not got on very far in the world, my poor fellow! Selling ‘a highly remunerative invention.’ Ha! ha! ‘… for personal reasons.’ We know all about those ‘personal reasons.’ No money, isn’t that what it is? You want to catch some jay of a manufacturer on a nicely limed ‘patent,’ do you? Ah, well, you always had rather a notion of turning the world upside down. Ah, my lad, where are all our fine notions now! And those extravagant, romantic days when we were young!”</p>
			<p>Bondy lay back in his chair once more.</p>
			<p>“It’s quite likely it really is Marek,” he reflected. “Still, Marek had a head for science. He was a bit of a talker, but there was a touch of genius about the lad. He had ideas. In other respects he was a fearfully unpractical fellow. An absolute fool, in fact. It’s very surprising that he isn’t a Professor,” mused <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy. “I haven’t set eyes on him for twenty years. God knows what he has been up to; perhaps he’s come right down in the world. Yes, he must be down and out, living away over in Břevnov, poor chap⁠ ⁠… and getting a living out of inventions! What an awful finish!”</p>
			<p>He tried to imagine the straits of the fallen inventor. He managed to picture a horribly shaggy and dishevelled head, surrounded by dismal paper walls like those in a film. There is no furniture, only a mattress in the corner, and a pitiful model made of spools, nails, and match-ends on the table. A murky window looks out on a little yard. Upon this scene of unspeakable indigence enters a visitor in rich furs. “I have come to have a look at your invention.” The half-blind inventor fails to recognize his old schoolfellow. He humbly bows his tousled head, looks about for a seat to offer to his guest, and then, oh Heaven! with his poor, stiff, shaking fingers he tries to get his sorry invention going⁠—it’s some crazy perpetual motion device⁠—and mumbles confusedly that it should work, and certainly <em>would</em> work, if only he had⁠ ⁠… if only he could buy⁠ ⁠… The fur-coated visitor looks all round the garret, and suddenly he takes a leather wallet from his pocket and lays on the table one, two (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy takes fright and cries “That’s enough!”) three thousand-crown notes. (“One would have been quite enough⁠ ⁠… to go on with, I mean,” protests something in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy’s brain.)</p>
			<p>“There is⁠ ⁠… something to carry on the work with, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marek. No, no, you’re not in any way indebted to me. Who am I? That doesn’t matter. Just take it that I am a friend.”</p>
			<p>Bondy found this scene very pleasant and touching.</p>
			<p>“I’ll send my secretary to Marek,” he resolved; “tomorrow without fail. And what shall I do today? It’s a holiday; I’m not going to the works. My time’s my own⁠ ⁠… a wretched state things are in! Nothing to do all day long! Suppose I went round today myself.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy hesitated. It would be a bit of an adventure to go and see for oneself how that queer fellow was struggling along in Břevnov.</p>
			<p>“After all, we were such chums! And old times have their claim on one. Yes, I’ll go!” decided <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy. And he went.</p>
			<p>He had rather a boring time while his car was gliding all over Břevnov in search of a mean hovel bearing the number 1651. They had to inquire at the police-station.</p>
			<p>“Marek, Marek,” said the inspector, searching his memory. “That must be Marek the engineer, of Marek and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, the electric lamp factory, 1651, Mixa Street.”</p>
			<p>The electric lamp factory! Bondy felt disappointed, even annoyed. Rudy Marek wasn’t living up in a garret, then! He was a manufacturer and wanted to sell some invention or other “for personal reasons.” If that didn’t smell of bankruptcy, his name wasn’t Bondy.</p>
			<p>“Do you happen to know how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marek is doing?” he asked the police inspector, with a casual air, as he took his seat in the car.</p>
			<p>“Oh, splendidly!” the inspector answered. “He’s got a very fine business.” Local pride made him add, “The firm’s very well known”; and he amplified this with: “A very wealthy man, and a learned one, too. He does nothing but make experiments.”</p>
			<p>“Mixa Street!” cried Bondy to his chauffeur.</p>
			<p>“Third on the right!” the inspector called after the car.</p>
			<p>Bondy was soon ringing at the residential part of quite a pretty little factory.</p>
			<p>“It’s all very nice and clean here,” he remarked to himself. “Flowerbeds in the yard, creeper on the walls. Humph! There always was a touch of the philanthropist and reformer about that confounded Marek.” And at that moment Marek himself came out on the steps to meet him; Rudy Marek, awfully thin and serious-looking, up in the clouds, so to speak. It gave Bondy a queer pang to find him neither so young as he used to be nor so unkempt as that inventor; so utterly different from what Bondy had imagined that he was scarcely recognizable. But before he could fully realize his disillusionment, Marek stretched out his hand and said quietly, “Well, so you’ve come at last, Bondy! I’ve been expecting you!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
