<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: The Hammer and Star</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Hammer and Star</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Brother Senior Warden, what do you see in the East?” asked the Worshipful Master. He was dressed all in black, wore the white leather apron, and held the silver gavel in his hand.</p>
			<p>“I see the Masters assembled in the Temple and ready for labour,” said the Senior Warden.</p>
			<p>The Worshipful Master gave a knock with his gavel.</p>
			<p>“Brother Junior Warden, what do you see in the West?”</p>
			<p>“I see the Masters assembled in the Temple and ready for labour.”</p>
			<p>The Worshipful Master knocked three times with his gavel. “Let the labour begin.”</p>
			<p>The Brothers of the Free French Masonic Lodge, “The Hammer and Star,” took their seats, never taking their eyes off the Worshipful Master, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy, who had called them together at such an unusual time. The lodge was as quiet as a church between the black-draped walls with the maxims of the craft woven in the hangings. Bondy, the Worshipful Master, was pale and thoughtful.</p>
			<p>“Brothers,” said the Worshipful Master after a while, “I have summoned this unusual meeting⁠ ⁠… for this⁠ ⁠… er⁠ ⁠… unusual labour, which in⁠ ⁠… er⁠ ⁠… unusual opposition to the secret precepts of our Order⁠ ⁠… is no mere formality. I know⁠ ⁠… that I am violating the solemn and consecrated form of our labour⁠ ⁠… in asking you to come to a decision upon⁠ ⁠… a really serious⁠ ⁠… and public matter⁠ ⁠… of the highest importance.”</p>
			<p>“The Worshipful Master in the Chair has the right to order our labour,” declared the Judex Formidabilis, causing general agitation among his hearers.</p>
			<p>“Well, then,” began <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Bondy, “it concerns the systematic attacks⁠ ⁠… upon our Order recently begun⁠ ⁠… by the Clerical party. They state that our secret activities⁠ ⁠… of the last hundred years⁠ ⁠… are connected with certain extraordinary⁠ ⁠… and regrettable occurrences⁠ ⁠… in the industrial and spiritual field. The Clericalist papers assert that the Masonic Lodges⁠ ⁠… have brought about⁠ ⁠… deliberately⁠ ⁠… this unfettering of demoniacal powers. I ask you⁠ ⁠… what we ought to do⁠ ⁠… in the present time of calamity⁠ ⁠… for the benefit of mankind⁠ ⁠… and for the honour of the Most High. This subject is now open for discussion.”</p>
			<p>After a moment’s solemn silence the Junior Warden arose.</p>
			<p>“Brothers, at this historic moment, I welcome, so to speak, the impressive words uttered by our Worshipful Master. He spoke, so to speak, of regrettable occurrences. And indeed, we who concern ourselves, so to speak, only with the welfare of mankind, are bound to declare all these regrettable miracles, illuminations, fits of love for one’s neighbour, and other disturbances to be occurrences which are, so to speak, in the highest degree regrettable. We must with all the discretion we owe to our Order decline all connection, so to speak, with these regrettable facts which, so to speak, do not agree with the traditional and progressive principles of our Great Order. Brothers, these regrettable principles are, so to speak, in fundamental disagreement with it, as our Worshipful Master very rightly said, since the Clericals, so to speak, have taken up arms against us, and if we have in mind, so to speak, the highest interests of mankind, I therefore move that we should express our agreement in the fullest sense of the word, as the Worshipful Master in the Chair very rightly said, these regrettable occurrences.”</p>
			<p>Judex Formidabilis now rose.</p>
			<p>“Brother Worshipful Master, I should like to say a few words. I have to observe that certain occurrences have been spoken of here in a very regrettable manner. I am of opinion that those occurrences are not so regrettable as our Brother Junior Warden thinks. I am really not aware which occurrences Brother Junior Warden is alluding to, but if he has in mind the religious meetings which I myself attend, then I am of the opinion that he is mistaken. Indeed, I will say frankly that I consider that he is entirely in error.”</p>
			<p>“I move,” suggested another brother, “that we should take a vote on whether the said occurrences are regrettable or not.”</p>
			<p>“And I move,” said another, taking the floor, “that we elect a smaller committee, of some three members, say, to investigate these regrettable occurrences.”</p>
			<p>“I am in favour of five members.”</p>
			<p>“I vote for twelve.”</p>
			<p>Judex Formidabilis was heard to say, “Excuse me, brothers, I have not yet finished speaking.”</p>
			<p>The Worshipful Master rapped with his gavel.</p>
			<p>“I call upon Brother Judex Formidabilis.”</p>
			<p>“Brothers,” began Judex gently, “we will not quarrel who is to have the floor. The occurrences concerning which several regrettable opinions have been expressed here are of a character that deserves attention, interest, yes, and even respect. I do not deny that I am a member of several religious circles who have received divine grace in especial power. I trust that this is not inconsistent with the discipline of the Freemason.”</p>
			<p>“Not at all,” said several voices.</p>
			<p>“Moreover, I have to admit that I myself have been privileged to perform a few minor miracles. I think that this does not conflict with my rank and degree.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not.”</p>
			<p>“May I therefore, speaking from my own experiences, state that the aforesaid occurrences are, on the contrary, praiseworthy, uplifting, and moral, that they contribute to the welfare of mankind and the glory of the Most High, and therefore⁠—from the Masonic standpoint⁠—there can be no objection to them. I move that our Lodge should declare its neutrality with respect to all these manifestations of the divine presence.”</p>
			<p>The Senior Warden rose and said: “Brothers, I certainly don’t believe in any of this stuff, and I’ve seen nothing of it; all the same I’m in favour of standing up for religion. I don’t think that there’s anything in it, but is there any reason why we should say so? I therefore move that we secretly let it be known that we have the very best information about the whole business, and that we approve of things going on as they are.”</p>
			<p>The Worshipful Master raised his eyes and said: “I call the attention of the brethren to the fact that the Industrial Federation has elected the Absolute as its honorary President. Further, that the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">M.E.C.</abbr> shares, the so-called Absolute Stock, may go up still higher. In this connection I may say that a donor who wishes to remain unknown has contributed one thousand shares to the Benevolent Fund of our Lodge. The meeting will now proceed.”</p>
			<p>The Junior Warden announced: “I beg to withdraw, so to speak, the regrettable occurrences. From the higher point of view I entirely agree. I move that we discuss the matter from the higher point of view.”</p>
			<p>The Worshipful Master raised his eyes and said, “I have to inform you that the Grand Lodge intends to issue instructions relating to the recent occurrences. The Grand Lodge recommends the Masters to join religious circles and organize them in the Masonic sense for the instruction of apprentices in the craft. The new Temples are to be conducted in an enlightened and anticlerical spirit. It is desirable to examine the various doctrines⁠—monism, abstinence, Fletcherism, vegetarianism, and so forth. Each circle is to be instructed in a different faith in order to test out practically which is the best for the welfare of mankind and for the glory of the Most High. These activities are obligatory on all Masters by decree of the Grand Lodge. The meeting will now proceed.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
