<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Pantheism</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Pantheism</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>G. H. Bondy felt rather as though he were dreaming. Marek settled him in an easy chair with quite maternal solicitude, and made haste to bring some brandy.</p>
			<p>“Here, drink this up quickly,” he jerked out hoarsely, offering him the glass with a trembling hand. “<em>You</em> came over queer down there too, didn’t you?”</p>
			<p>“On the contrary,” Bondy answered unsteadily. “It was⁠ ⁠… it was beautiful, old chap! I felt as if I were flying, or something like that.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” said Marek quickly. “That’s exactly what I mean. As though you were flying along, or rather soaring upward, wasn’t that it?”</p>
			<p>“It was a feeling of perfect bliss,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy. “I think it’s what you’d call being transported. As if there was something down there⁠ ⁠… something⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Something⁠—holy?” asked Marek hesitatingly.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps. Yes, man alive, you’re right. I never go to church, Rudy, never in my life, but down in that cellar I felt as if I were in church. Tell me, man, what did I do down there?”</p>
			<p>“You went on your knees,” Marek muttered with a bitter smile, and began striding up and down the room.</p>
			<p>Bondy stroked his bald head in bewilderment.</p>
			<p>“That’s extraordinary. But come, on my knees? Well, then, tell me what⁠ ⁠… what is there in the cellar that acts on one so queerly?”</p>
			<p>“The Karburator,” growled Marek, gnawing his lips. His cheeks seemed even more sunken than before, and were as pale as death.</p>
			<p>“But, confound it, man,” cried Bondy in amazement, “how can it be?”</p>
			<p>The engineer only shrugged his shoulders, and with bent head went on pacing up and down the room.</p>
			<p>G. H. Bondy’s eyes followed him with childish astonishment. “The man’s crazy,” he said to himself. “All the same, what the devil is it that comes over one in that cellar? That tormenting bliss, that tremendous security, that terror, that overwhelming feeling of devotion, or whatever you like to call it.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy arose and poured himself out another dash of brandy.</p>
			<p>“I say, Marek,” he said, “I’ve got it now.”</p>
			<p>“Got what?” exclaimed Marek, halting.</p>
			<p>“That business in the cellar. That queer psychical condition. It’s some form of poisoning, isn’t it?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Marek gave an angry laugh. “Oh, yes, of course, poisoning!”</p>
			<p>“I thought so at once,” declared Bondy, his mind at rest in an instant. “That apparatus of yours produces something, ah⁠ ⁠… er⁠ ⁠… something like ozone, doesn’t it? Or more likely poisonous gas. And when anyone inhales it, it⁠ ⁠… er⁠ ⁠… poisons him or excites him somehow, isn’t that it? Why, of course, man, it’s nothing but poisonous gases; they’re probably given off somehow by the combustion of the coal in that⁠ ⁠… that Karburator of yours. Some sort of illuminating gas or paradise gas, or phosgene or something of the sort. That’s why you’ve put in the ventilator, and that’s why you wear a gas-mask when you go into the cellar, isn’t it? Just some confounded gases.”</p>
			<p>“If only there were nothing but <em>gases</em>!” Marek burst out, shaking his fists threateningly. “Look here, Bondy, that’s why I must sell that Karburator! I simply can’t stand it⁠—I can’t stand it⁠ ⁠… <em>I can’t stand it</em>,” he shouted, well-nigh weeping. “I never dreamed my Karburator would do anything like <em>this</em>⁠ ⁠… this⁠ ⁠… terrifying mischief! Just think, it’s been going on like <em>that</em> from the very beginning! And every one feels it who comes near the thing. You haven’t any notion even yet, Bondy. But our porter caught it properly.”</p>
			<p>“Poor fellow!” said the astonished Bondy, full of sympathy. “And did he die of it?”</p>
			<p>“No, but he got <em>converted</em>,” cried Marek in despair. “Bondy, you’re a man I can confide in. My invention, my Karburator, has one terrible defect. Nevertheless, you’re going to buy it or else take it from me as a gift. You will, Bondy⁠—even if it spews forth demons. It doesn’t matter to you, Bondy, so long as you can get your millions out of it. And you’ll get them, man. It’s a stupendous thing, I tell you⁠—; but I don’t want to have anything more to do with it. You haven’t such a sensitive conscience as I have, you know, Bondy. It’ll bring in millions, thousands of millions; but it will lay a frightful load upon your conscience. Make up your mind!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, leave me alone,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy protested. “If it gives off poisonous gases, the authorities will prohibit it, and there’s an end of it. You know the wretched state of affairs here. Now in America⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“It isn’t poisonous gases,” Marek exclaimed. “It’s <em>something a thousand times worse</em>. Mark what I tell you, Bondy, it’s something beyond human reason, but there’s not a scrap of deception about it. Well, then, my Karburator actually does burn up matter, causes its utter combustion, so that not even a grain of dust remains. Or rather, it breaks it up, crushes it, splits it up into electrons, consumes it, grinds it⁠—I don’t know how to express it⁠—in short, uses it up completely. You have no idea what a colossal amount of energy is contained in the atoms. With half a hundredweight of coal in the Karburator you can sail right round the world in a steamship, you can light the whole city of Prague, you can supply power for the whole of a huge factory, or anything you like. A bit of coal the size of a nut will do the heating and the cooking for a whole family. And ultimately we shan’t even require coal; we can do our heating with the first pebble or handful of dirt we pick up in front of the house. Every scrap of matter has in it more energy than an enormous boiler; you’ve only to extract it. You’ve only to know how to secure total combustion! Well, Bondy, I can do it; my Karburator can do it. You’ll admit, Bondy, that it has been worth while toiling over it for twenty years.”</p>
			<p>“Look here, Rudy,” Bondy began slowly, “it’s all very extraordinary⁠—but I believe you, so to speak. On my soul, I do believe you. You know, when I stood in front of that Karburator of yours, I felt that I was in the presence of something overpoweringly great, something a man could not withstand. I can’t help it: I believe you. Down there in the cellar you have something uncanny, something that will overturn the whole world.”</p>
			<p>“Alas, Bondy,” Marek whispered anxiously, “that’s just where the trouble is. Listen, and I’ll tell you the whole thing. Have you ever read Spinoza?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“No more had I. But now, you see, I’m beginning to read that sort of thing. I don’t understand it⁠—it’s terribly difficult stuff for us technical people⁠—but there’s something in it. Do you by any chance believe in God?”</p>
			<p>“I? Well, now⁠ ⁠…” G. H. Bondy deliberated. “Upon my word, I couldn’t say. Perhaps there is a God, but He’s on some other planet. Not on ours. Oh, well, that sort of thing doesn’t fit in with our times at all. Tell me, what makes you drag that into it?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t believe in anything,” said Marek in a hard voice. “I don’t want to believe. I have always been an atheist. I believed in matter and in progress and in nothing else. I’m a scientific man, Bondy; and science cannot admit the existence of God.”</p>
			<p>“From the business point of view,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy remarked, “it’s a matter of indifference. If He wants to exist, in Heaven’s name, let Him. We aren’t mutually exclusive.”</p>
			<p>“But from the scientific point of view, Bondy,” cried the engineer sternly, “it is absolutely intolerable. It’s a case of Him or science. I don’t assert that God does not exist; I only assert that He ought not to exist, or at least <em>ought</em> not to let Himself be seen. And I believe that science is crowding Him out step by step, or at any rate is preventing Him from letting Himself be seen; and I believe that that is the greatest mission of science.”</p>
			<p>“Possibly,” said Bondy calmly. “But go on.”</p>
			<p>“And now just imagine, Bondy, that⁠—But wait, I’ll put it to you this way. Do you know what Pantheism is? It’s the belief that God, or the Absolute, if you prefer it, is manifest in everything that exists. In men, as in stones, in the grass, the water⁠—everywhere. And do you know what Spinoza teaches? That matter is only the outward manifestation, only one phase of the divine substance, the other phase of which is spirit. And do you know what Fechner teaches?”</p>
			<p>“No, I don’t,” the other admitted.</p>
			<p>“Fechner teaches that everything, everything that is, is penetrated with the divine, that God fills with His being the whole of the matter in the world. And do you know Leibniz? Leibniz teaches that physical matter is composed of psychical atoms, monads, whose nature is divine. What do you say to that?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said G. H. Bondy. “I don’t understand it.”</p>
			<p>“Nor do I. It’s fearfully abstruse. But let us assume, for the sake of argument, that God is contained in all forms of physical matter, that He is, as it were, imprisoned in it. And when you smash this matter up completely, He flies out of it as though from a box. He is suddenly set free. He is released from matter as illuminating gas is from coal. You have only to burn one single atom up completely, and immediately the whole cellar is filled with the Absolute. It’s simply appalling how quickly it spreads.”</p>
			<p>“Hold on,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bondy interrupted. “Say that all over again, but say it slowly.”</p>
			<p>“Look at it like this then,” said Marek. “We’re assuming that all matter contains the Absolute in some state of confinement. We can call it a latent imprisoned force, or simply say that as God is omnipresent He is therefore present in all matter and in every particle of matter. And now suppose you utterly destroy a piece of matter, apparently leaving not the slightest residue. Then, since all matter is really Matter plus Absolute, what you have destroyed is <em>only</em> the matter, and you’re left with an indestructible residue⁠—free and active Absolute. You’re left with the chemically unanalysable, immaterial residue, which shows no spectrum lines, neither atomic weight nor chemical affinity, no obedience to Boyle’s law, none, none whatever, of the properties of matter. What is left behind is pure God. A chemical nullity which acts with monstrous energy. Being immaterial, it is not subject to the laws of matter. Thence it already follows that its manifestations are contrary to nature and downright miraculous. All this proceeds from the assumption that God is present in all matter. Can you imagine, for the sake of argument, that He is really so present?”</p>
			<p>“I certainly can,” said Bondy. “What then?”</p>
			<p>“Good,” said Marek, rising to his feet. “Then <em>it’s the solemn truth</em>.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
